Lab 6: Automated Monitoring Setup (Ubuntu)   100 pts

Ten practical tasks. Every task ends with a screenshot as evidence.

Rules for every question:
- No command-line editor (nano, vim, vi, or visudo in edit mode). The only way to write or change a file is cat, with the text in a here-document: a line such as cat > file <<'EOF', then the text, then a line containing only EOF. Output redirection like > and >> is fine.
- The terminal prompt (username and hostname) must be visible.
- Where a question says "Explain", type one sentence as a # comment line in the same terminal, then take the screenshot.
- End the terminal with a comment line: # AI used: No   or   # AI used: Yes, (what you asked it and what you changed)
- Do not assume account/IP values that are specific to your own VM; substitute your real ones (USER, UBUNTU_IP).
- Paste commands in blocks, but run any command that asks you a question on its own, answer it, then continue.
- This lab reuses Lab 5's Ubuntu VM directly: no new SSH setup is needed.
- All of Questions 2-10 run on the same Ubuntu VM used in Lab 5.


Question 1 (10 pts)
Confirm the Server

Done from Kali, into the same Ubuntu VM used in Lab 5. No new setup is needed, just confirm you are on the right machine before starting.

ssh USER@UBUNTU_IP
hostnamectl

Explain (type it as a # comment line in the terminal): why this lab needs no separate setup step.

Screenshot: the Kali prompt, the ssh command, and hostnamectl output.


Question 2 (10 pts)
Install fail2ban

Install the tool this lab is built around, and confirm the package actually landed.

Package: fail2ban, not installed by default.

sudo apt install -y fail2ban
dpkg -l | grep fail2ban

Explain (type it as a # comment line in the terminal): what fail2ban is for, in one sentence.

Screenshot: the install finishing and dpkg confirming it is present.


Question 3 (10 pts)
Check the sshd Jail

Confirm the service itself is running, then check the specific jail that watches SSH logins.

sudo systemctl status fail2ban
sudo fail2ban-client status sshd

Explain (type it as a # comment line in the terminal): what "jail" means in fail2ban's own terms.

Screenshot: systemctl showing active (running), and the sshd jail status.


Question 4 (10 pts)
Preview Log Rotation

Preview what logrotate would do, without actually rotating anything yet.

sudo logrotate -d /etc/logrotate.conf

Explain (type it as a # comment line in the terminal): why -d matters here, versus running it for real.

Screenshot: the full preview output.


Question 5 (10 pts)
Search auth.log

Search the real authentication log for failed login attempts.

sudo grep "Failed password" /var/log/auth.log

Explain (type it as a # comment line in the terminal): what it would mean if this came back completely empty.

Screenshot: the matching lines, or the empty result if there are none.


Question 6 (10 pts)
Check the Current Time

Check the system clock two ways: the short form, then the full status.

date
timedatectl

Explain (type it as a # comment line in the terminal): what timedatectl tells you that plain date does not.

Screenshot: the output of both commands.


Question 7 (10 pts)
Confirm chrony Is Synced

Install the time-sync daemon if it is missing, then confirm this server's clock is actually synced.

Package: chrony, not installed by default.

sudo apt install -y chrony
chronyc tracking

Explain (type it as a # comment line in the terminal): what the System time line is telling you.

Screenshot: the chronyc tracking output with the offset visible.


Question 8 (10 pts)
Check the Trusted Source

Confirm which time server this machine actually trusts right now.

chronyc sources

Explain (type it as a # comment line in the terminal): what the * next to one line means.

Screenshot: the sources output with the trusted line visible.


Question 9 (10 pts)
Read the Hardware Clock

Read the battery-backed clock directly, separate from the system clock.

sudo hwclock --show

Explain (type it as a # comment line in the terminal): why this clock can differ from the system clock after a long shutdown.

Screenshot: the hwclock output.


Question 10 (10 pts)
Write the Summary Report

Combine today's date, the sync status, and the fail2ban jail status into one report file.

{ date; chronyc tracking; sudo fail2ban-client status sshd; } > monitor-report.txt
cat monitor-report.txt

Explain (type it as a # comment line in the terminal): why a sysadmin would want all three in one file, not three screenshots.

Screenshot: the full contents of monitor-report.txt.
